Yeah, we'll drive to the locations.
Nance will photograph them.
We'll develop the prints.
I'll put them up on the desk.
And as I'm writing the scene, the starting point will always be that specific place.
And I can go back and I can point to it.
But to give you a for instance, in the first book, there's a deco, an art deco hotel that the drug lord lives in.
And the starting point for it
was the old Aurora down on Main Street.
Oh, there you go.
Oh, yeah, just drive you crazy.
So the starting point was the Aurora down on Main Street.
There you go.
But if you read it in the book, clearly, you know, it is not the Aurora.
It is the Aurora, you know,
magnified, you know, turned around, reassembled.
That's my feeling, you know.
Right.
I'm here to do whatever I want to, you know.
So, the second book, I was in the process of writing it while the first book was going to print.
And the second book came out in fall, I guess October of...
And that was a lot of fun when that book was published, because I went on two publicity tours for the first time.
And the first tour, we went to the Midwest.
It was me and five other crime writers from Mysterious Press, all big-time pros.
We had an assortment.
We had the most diverse array of personalities.
We had Marsha Muller.
K.K.
Beck, Jim Crumley, Peter Lovesy, and Paco Taibo and myself.
And what we did was they started us in Omaha, Nebraska at a convention.
We were there for three days and then we got on a bus and we went to, oh God, we went to Des Moines, we went to Milwaukee, we went to Minneapolis, we went to Chicago.
And most of it, we flew a few places to save time, but we were mainly on a bus.
We had a chartered bus.
And so they took these six strangers, threw them on the bus.
You know, it was like something on MTV.
It was, we sort of got to live together.
Oh, it was great.
It was, you know, it was wonderful.
Were you, like, signing at mystery bookshops and stuff?
Yeah, we'd have, every town we'd go to, we'd go to bookstores,
We'd go to radio stations, we'd go to some TV stations, and then we'd meet with the local press.
I would guess so, yeah.
Taking the six of us out to dinner every night was a... It was a harrowing prospect, yeah.
And the great part for me was, you know, I had never gotten a chance to really know any other professional writers, you know.
And my dream my whole life was to get to know some of these people.
And every one of them...
was just magnificent to me you know they just treated me so you know i was clearly the low man on the totem bowl it was only my second book nobody out there knew who i was you know we'd go to signings and jim crumley would literally have people who had driven a thousand miles in a van you know i remember we were in milwaukee and a guy got out of a van with a case of beer and handed him the case of beer and he had all his first editions to be signed you know dating back to the first book you know the first military book that
one to Count Cadence, and he said, I own a restaurant in Key West, and if you ever come down there and, you know, every meal you want is on the house, you know, they're just worshipping it, you know.
And these people were just... How did the second book do?
The second book did good, went into a paperback edition, and it garnered, you know, some good reviews.
It got named as, who's the Los Angeles Times critic?
Champlin?
I can't remember his name.
He picked it as one of the top 10 crime novels in 93, which we got a lot of mileage on that.
That was great.
And that brings us to the current book.
So tell me what the goals are.
I mean, this is a long, this is a sustained fall.
Oh, man.
I mean, you try to get more each time.
Each new book, you hope they get the paperbacks of the earlier books.
Absolutely.
It's just a building process.
My game plan is I leave, and I don't know if it's lax or not, but he's so good at it, I leave almost all those details to my agent.
He knows how to build a career, and I do not.
So I've decided my job is to write the books.
And from that point on, he knows what to do.
How frequently does he want them to come out?
This is like three years, two and a half years.
Yeah, this is a problem.
I'd like to get them to him.
I mean, one a year.
Sooner.
Yeah, the publisher would like to have it, you know, every year, have one out there.
You've got to keep that name recognition.
But I can't see where that is ever going to happen for me.
A, for a couple of reasons.
One is that the books are getting longer.
You know, the last book, by the draft that we turned in to the publisher, which was probably my sixth or seventh draft at that point,
was in excess of 150,000 words.
We cut it down severely after that.
They had to be close to a dozen drafts by the time the book came out.
They like 90,000 words.
Yeah, they get real nervous once you cross that 100,000 mark.
Mine is 250.
So you can imagine.
My first contract was for 90,000 words.
You know, you can't make it conform to some... I think you tell me what to cut.
Right.
That's exactly right.
You're right.
You know, there's a... Tell me.
Tell me.
What's superfluous here?
What's repetitive?
And what... What doesn't belong?
What is going to make it a... What cut is going to make it a better book?
I don't, you know... That's why that was another kind of bone of contention with randomness, that they were going to make me cut 200 pages.
Not to make it a better book.
to make it a less expensive book.
It's an accounting process.
And it was production costs.
Absolutely.
And Alan, I think I could hope, God bless him when he took it on.
I said, well, Alan, I really cut this thing.
He said, who told you to cut it?
I didn't tell you to cut it.
That's what you want to hear?
And I said, well, shit, it's a big book.
He said, I told you.
He said, we're committed to the book.
God.
Whatever.
And then you look at things.
Look at the notes.
The notes are not an agate type.
The notes are full.
Absolutely.
You can read them.
Look at the end sheet.
You know, I mean, I got a...
It's a very small advance, $15,000, that's all I got.
But who cares?
They put the money into doing a beautiful, now we're up to $50,000.
They made a really quality product.
So have your royalties started kicking in yet?
No, I haven't got anything yet.
Nada.
I think mine come in April and October.
Is that when you're April?
So April, you should be a substantial check should become rolling.
Yeah, but you know they hold back 50%.
Yeah.
I just learned this the other day.
The reserves.
I had the numbers in my head, how much we're going to get, you know.
But there's some time period, and I never know what it is.
Yeah, that's the next one.
But you know what?
There are no returns in my book.
My book's been on back order since day one.
So they shouldn't even hold anything back from the first payment.
And he said to me, he said, this does suck, because as we speak, we're 2,400 copies on back order.
And your agent should be able to... It's the contract.
They're going to hold to it, yeah.
It's fine.
Next October.
That's in the next one.
That one was on the church.
This one's on hope.
That's right.
Exactly.
That's a good way to look at it.
Oh, man.
So we're talking about building the oeuvre, so to speak.
Well, do you ever see leaving the insurance business, or is writing always going to be a label of love for you?
My standard answer to that
is that, you know, it's simplistic.
Yeah, and it isn't even that.
It's that, you know, I'm so ritualistic and superstitious that my feeling is it isn't broke.
I don't want to fix it.
You know, I almost feel like... Well, you know, I say to myself, and I've discussed it with my wife, let's assume I became full-time.
I wonder, you know, would it change my whole attitude toward the writing?
Suddenly, oh, you know...
this is my income, I've got to do it, it fulfills certain other responsibilities now, and I, you know, I don't want to, I sort of don't want to think about the writing that way, you know, hopefully, Blackwood, but we'll see what happens.
So, how about characters, and I can't say I've read the whole corpus now, but do you see continuing characters, and are there everyone... No, everyone, I have a
That would be the easy way.
Yeah.
I can't do a series character.
It just isn't in me to do it.
When the first book hit and it started to look good, the first thing the editor said to me was, you know, for the next book, are you bringing her back?
You know, bring the heroine back.
And I just, I can't.
She is, her name is.
In the first book, it was Lenore Thomas.
And I couldn't bring myself to do it.
I just can't.
I do have reoccurring characters, but usually they're background people, and it just provides some continuity from book to book.
But in terms of having, you know, that central focal point, you know, and that person's point of view continues book to book to book, I just, I can't write that way for some reason.
It just doesn't... Do you do any field work in terms of crime and talk to cops and stuff, or is that pretty much head stuff?
It's main, you know, you can, well, I shouldn't say that the reader is the judge, but it isn't that hard to...
fudge anything you need to fudge in terms of, you know, when the first book came out, I got some calls from a couple friends who read it who said, God, I've known you 10 years, you know, I never knew you were a gun nut.
And I said, I never owned a gun in my life.
You know, there's all this gun stuff in there.
You go to the Worcester Public Library, you take Encyclopedia of Guns down, boom.
You know, but I have, I have two uncles who were, you know, policemen for 30 years.
You know, I have a cousin who, and kids I went to school with who were all cops, you know.
And so I get great stories from them constantly.
And do they help you with the detail and the stuff?
They do.
And yet, what I'm always striving for is just enough versimilitude to get it over that.
In other words, I'm not aiming by any stretch of the imagination to do some kind of gritty, realistic, you know...
by-the-numbers police story.
This is not hard-boiled in any way in your view.
Well, it's gritty and it's hard-boiled, but it certainly isn't realist.
I mean, I don't really believe in realism.
I mean, I don't come out of that tradition.
I mean, the writers that I love and that I emulate and that I think that I steal from continually are people like Pinchon, or, you know, especially, you know, Latin Americans, you know, the guys who all pointed me in the right direction, you know, Garcia Marquez and
and Borges and stuff, you know, what I'm sort of doing is taking all these noir conventions and sort of slapping them over an Americanized magical realism, you know.
Do you hear from readers?
Yeah.
I got my first death threat not too long ago.
That was, yeah, I got a couple of, it was on the second book, actually.
when the second book came out, and it was from, and it was, I thought this was so appropriate, it was from Dallas, Texas, assassination capital of America, and it was on letterhead from some sort of a television station affiliate, you know, and some network affiliate, I said, oh, good, it's a media person, great, and it was, it was one of those classic unhinged letters, you know, just expletive, expletive, expletive, you know, and the problem was, you know, you, you are, uh,
You know, the foul language you use and the type of degenerates that you write about are, you know, exactly what is wrong with the moral fiber of America, you know.
Right, yeah, yeah.
And I sort of took that as a real badge of honor, you know.
I pushed exactly the button I wanted to push there.
Well, what do you hear from people around here?
People around here.
Maybe you're creating an image of their beloved hometown that...
You know, I've yet to have anybody, in the three books, I've yet to have somebody come up to me and say, you know, why the hell do you make Worcester look so bad, you know?
My feeling is the people who are sophisticated enough, the people who pick up the book in the first place, are sophisticated enough to say, oh, this is interesting what you're doing, you know, and...
And clearly, again, it isn't Worcester.
It isn't as if I'm blaspheming my hometown.
I mean, as I say to everybody, I love Worcester.
I've been here for 36 years.
I don't see that I'm going anywhere in the foreseeable future.
And to me, and this was, I talked to, I wrote to, I had the opportunity, the good fortune to meet
a couple years ago, Robert Cormier.
And what a wonderful guy.
As much as a wonderful writer, just a wonderful man, you know, just a warm, gracious individual.
As a matter of fact, I had a signing last week over at Tatnick, and I look up at one point, and he's standing there.
I just said, Robert Cormier, coming to my signing, something's wrong.
Something's out of whack.
He wrote a beautiful letter, and he wrote a thing in the Book of the Month book.
And I don't belong to him.
And Bob said, I am just so happy for you and all the good things, and he's read the reviews and the Washington Post, and I said, I had a handwritten letter.
He's just, oh, that's exactly how he is, you know.
And I said to him, in talking, you know, I said, you know, the first
15 years of your life, you know.
And when you're in this small city from a real middle-class environment, and you're reading these little paperbacks day and night, you're just eating them like candy, you know.
And the world of the paperbacks at times is seeming more real than the bourgeois life in the city.
Well, we baptized my first...
my older daughter down at Eden, you know, which my father-in-law owned.
Oh, my God!
I never knew that!
My father-in-law.
Oh, my God!
I married a Worcester girl, Connie is... Classic!
...who is, you know, next door, right?
And... Jeez!
So, when we baptized her, and I was, she was born in 81, and I was book editor in 78, so, and I got to know Bob right away, and he came, you know, with his wife, did the thing, and I, but my brother's daughters at that point were like 13, 14, and I said,
Lauren, I want you to meet Robert Cormier, and she was... A hero!
Just, you know, God has come down, absolutely.
She's 15, actually, because she's about 39.
I mean, it was... Holy mackerel, Robert Cormier!
Just amazing.
Just Robert Cormier.
You know Robert Cormier.
You scored points.
Here he is at my... But as I said to him, and the same thing happens in...
his books which I love so much is that you know those first years when you're a young person and you're wanting so badly so desperately to become a writer and you don't know how to become a writer you view your whole environment as such a limiting place you know like you have to transcend this in order to become you know I literally grew up with the idea that in order to become a writer you know you had to you had to like live in Manhattan you had to come from Manhattan you had to go to special schools you know you had to come from this whole different cast you know
And then what ends up happening, if you persist enough, is that you realize what you have of value to write about is exactly those things that you would have thought were limiting, you know.
And you just have to find the method.
The only guy that really does bemoan the fact that he hasn't done anything is Updike, you know.
He envies people who have life experiences because he's been so fortunate.
Trapped in horrible, heavenly farms.
He's been a successful writer from the age of 22.
From the start, you know.
Right.
And so he goes out on these trips, and lousy books come out of him.
You know, the one down in... The Brazil book?
The Brazil book.
Yeah.
Terrible.
The other one, the coup.
The coup from Africa, yeah.
Terrible, you know.
What can you say?
He just wants... Yeah.
But... Anyway, Jack, I think we... Do you have enough?
Do you have enough?
I'll give that to you.
You're close.
So if I have any questions...